---
title: Will ChatGPT replace Google Search?
date: 2023-08-22 21:54:00 UTC
categories: [Personal Essay, academic]
tags: [academic essay]
pin: false
published: false
---

## Introduction
Google, which can search for information quickly, has become one of the most successful search engines in the world today. According to Bianchi (2023), as of February 2021, Alphabet, the parent company of Google, has the second largest market capitalisation among global internet companies, and Google's advertising revenues reached “224.47 billion U.S. dollars in 2022”. Over the decades, Google has outperformed many rivals and continues to dominate the information search market.  In the search business, Google seem not to be threatened until the emergence of a new rival, which is ChatGPT. ChatGPT is “a large language model (LLM), a machine-learning system that autonomously learns from data and can produce sophisticated and seemingly intelligent writing after training on a massive data set of text” (van Dis et al., 2023, p. 224). After its birth, ChatGPT has grown rapidly, attracting many users, and posing a threat to Google in the information search market. This essay will evaluate whether ChatGPT will replace search engines, and firstly, consider the reasons for the great success of Google, then, explore the advantages, limitations, and profitability of ChatGPT, and argue that ChatGPT will keep leading search engines to make changes but most likely not completely replace them.

## Body
Before discussing whether ChatGPT can replace search engines, it is important to determine why search engines have been so successful. The success of today’s premier search engine, Google, is probably based on two main reasons. Firstly, Google can help people obtain the high-quality information quickly. According to Landeweerd, M et al. (2013), Google’s fast, well-organised, and easy-to-use search results keep users satisfied, even though Google has some drawbacks, it has not stopped users from using Google. People’s reliance on this easy access to information has allowed Google to expand rapidly and remain a major player in people’s lives today. Secondly, Google has decent profitability. Nabout and Skiera (2012) point out that, as search engines became the primary tool for consumers to locate information, a very popular form of online advertising was born, which is known broadly as search engine marketing, keyword advertising, and paid or sponsored search. This allows Google to make continuous profits. Google’s continued success is linked to its ability to generate revenue, as research and development cost plenty of money. According to Bianchi (2023), Alphabet, the parent company of Google, spent “39.5 billion U.S. dollars on research in 2022”. Google can further enhance its capabilities through revenues. Combined with the above discussion, Google, which is the biggest search engine today, could not have achieved so much without its powerful ability to access information and its strong ability to capture profits. If a competitor is to replace the current search engine in the future, it will need to perform no less well than Google on both factors. In other words, to replace the search engine, ChatGPT needs to have a proven ability to access information and a good performance in terms of profitability. In the next paragraphs, I will talk about the advantages of ChatGPT in accessing information.

ChatGPT’s ability to search for information has performed well and has demonstrated its strengths in several ways. Based on its powerful capabilities, ChatGPT has grown fast since its release. According to Wu et al. (2023), ChatGPT has attracted worldwide attention, and only two months after its launch, it has more than 100 million monthly active users. It suggests that ChatGPT has a competitive advantage in the market. Cutler’s research (2023) shows that ChatGPT understands advanced vocabulary and ideas, can accept more complex commands, and delivers highly stylised, grammatically correct written content. Thus, ChatGPT is not simply searching the web and giving existing answers. It is powerful because it “thinks”, i.e., it can understand the user’s intentions and summarise the relevant information into accurate answers to match. Besides, ChatGPT can understand the background of relevant problems and continuously interact with people to give appropriate and relevant information. Chatterjee and Dethlefs (2023) note that ChatGPT has a “memory” like humans, effectively remembering the user’s interactions with it and recalling previous user comments, and this is a feature that AI language models have not typically excelled at in the past. This ability means that ChatGPT can constantly modify its results according to the user’s requirements. In this way, it can provide the user with more appropriate information. The above features suggest that ChatGPT has a notable ability to search for information, which may allow it to compete with traditional search engines without losing out. However, ChatGPT also has its drawbacks. In the next section, I will discuss the limitations of ChatGPT.

On the other hand, ChatGPT has limitations in searching for information, which may affect ChatGPT’s competitiveness in the search market. The most obvious drawback of ChatGPT is that it doesn't always provide the accurate and correct information users want. Cutler’s research (2023) has also shown that ChatGPT does not provide real-time information, but only information from 2021 and before, and sometimes it provides false and illogical information. This makes the results provided by ChatGPT less credible. Besides that, the results presented by ChatGPT sometimes give inappropriate indications. This limitation is presented on the official website of OpenAI, which is the company that published ChatGPT. OpenAI's official website shows that ChatGPT sometimes reacts to negative commands or exhibits deviant actions (openai.com, 2022). This can cause concern for ChatGPT users. Although ChatGPT has obvious advantages in some areas and poses a threat to search engines, ChatGPT’s impact on search engines may be limited due to these drawbacks. These issues need to be addressed if ChatGPT is to replace search engines fully. ChatGPT has a mixed record of performance in terms of its ability for information searching, but what about its profitability? In the next section, its profitability will be discussed.

ChatGPT is currently using the “freemium” business model to generate profits, but as it has just been released, there is not enough authoritative data to draw definite conclusions about its profitability. It cannot display commercial advertisements on a large scale like search engines because of its chat-based style of information search results. This is probably why ChatGPT uses a business model called “freemium”. Freemium refers to “Users get basic features at no cost and can access richer functionality for a subscription fee” (Kumar, 2014, p. 27). ChatGPT provides basic services for free to its users, but the users can pay $20 per month to get ChatGPT’s value-added services (openai.com, 2023). Based on past studies, this business model has better sustainability. According to Kumar (2014), the monthly fees typically charged are a more sustainable source of revenue than the advertising model popularised by web companies at the beginning of the 2000s. Nonetheless, at the time of writing this essay less than a year after the launch of ChatGPT, there is not enough authoritative data to get a definite ChatGPT profitability. However, we can roughly deduce that ChatGPT's profitability will probably not be an obstacle to its growth based on its fast-growing number of users and sustainable business model.

## Conclusion
In conclusion, ChatGPT has quite a few advantages in its ability in information searching, and its emergence poses a threat to search engines, forcing them to make changes and continuously optimise their ability to search. However, due to ChatGPT's limitations in searching for information, it may be difficult for it to replace search engines, despite its sustainable profitability. Moreover, today’s search engines are constantly optimising using AI technology to enhance their ability in searching for information and to ensure that it continues to be competitive in the information search market. This makes it even more difficult for ChatGPT to replace search engines. Therefore, ChatGPT will most likely not completely subvert or replace search engines, but it will keep leading search engines to make changes. In the future, the development of AI technology will continue to affect search engines, and search engines will become more and more comprehensive and intelligent. In this essay, I have evaluated whether ChatGPT will replace search engines. Firstly, I have considered the reasons for Google's success and then I have explored the advantages, limitations, and profitability of ChatGPT. Finally, I argue that ChatGPT will keep leading search engines make a difference, but probably won't replace them entirely.

<br>

## Reference List

- Abou Nabout, N. and Skiera, B. (2012) “Return on Quality Improvements in Search Engine Marketing,” _Journal of Interactive Marketing,_ 26(3), pp. 141–154. doi: 10.1016/j.intmar.2011.11.001.

- Bianchi, T. (2023) _Alphabet R&D costs 2022, Statista._ Available at: https://www.statista.com/statistics/507858/alphabet-google-rd-costs/ (Accessed: 20 August 2023).

- Bianchi, T. (2023) _Google revenue 2002-2022, Statista._ Available at: https://www.statista.com/statistics/266206/googles-annual-global-revenue/ (Accessed: 23 July 2023).

- Chatterjee, J. and Dethlefs, N. (2023) “This New Conversational Ai Model Can Be Your Friend, Philosopher, and Guide ... and Even Your Worst Enemy,” _Patterns,_ 4(1). doi: 10.1016/j.patter.2022.100676.

- Cutler, K. (2023) “Chatgpt and Search Engine Optimisation: The Future Is Here,” _Applied Marketing Analytics,_ 9(1), pp. 8–22.

- Kumar, V. (2014) “Making ‘freemium’ Work: Many Start-Ups Fail to Recognize the Challenges of This Popular Business Model.(idea Watch),” _Harvard Business Review,_ 92(5), p. 27.

- Landeweerd, M., Spil, T. and Klein, R. (2013) “The success of Google Search, the failure of Google Health and the future of google plus”, _Grand Successes and Failures in IT. Public and Private Sectors,_ pp. 221–239. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-38862-0_14.

- OpenAI (2022) _Introducing ChatGPT._ Available at: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt (Accessed: 23 July 2023).

- OpenAI (2023) _Introducing ChatGPT Plus._ Available at: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt-plus (Accessed: 24 July 2023).

- van Dis, E. A. M. et al. (2023) “Chatgpt: Five Priorities for Research,” _Nature : International weekly journal of science,_ 614(7947), pp. 224–226. doi: 10.1038/d41586-023-00288-7.

- Wu, T. et al. (2023) “A Brief Overview of Chatgpt: The History, Status Quo and Potential Future Development,” _IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica,_ 10(5). doi: 10.1109/JAS.2023.123618.
