---
title: "Null in Java: A Bad Invention."
date: 2024-01-26 23:09:00 UTC
categories: [(CS) Learning Note, Java]
tags: [software engineering, Java]
pin: false
---

In the programming field, there are a lot of wrong inventions. `Null` References is one of them. Java introduced this invention in the initial version, which led many developers to develop the bad habit of using null mindlessly. **Although `Optional` was used to replace `Null` after Java 8, the bad habit of using `Null` cannot be replaced.**

> "I call it my billion-dollar mistake. It was the invention of the `Null` reference in 1965. At that time, I was designing the first comprehensive type system for references in an object-oriented language (ALGOL W). My goal was to ensure that all use of references should be absolutely safe, with checking performed automatically by the compiler. **But I couldn't resist the temptation to put in a null reference, simply because it was so easy to implement. This has led to innumerable errors, vulnerabilities, and system crashes, which have probably caused a billion dollars of pain and damage in the last forty years.**"
> 
> --- Tony Hoare (Turing Award winner)

- Related video: [Null References: The Billion Dollar Mistake](https://www.infoq.com/presentations/Null-References-The-Billion-Dollar-Mistake-Tony-Hoare/)

---
<center><font size='5'> Contents </font></center>

---

<!-- TOC -->
  * [What is `Null` in Java?](#what-is-null-in-java)
  * [Why `Null` is A Bad Invention?](#why-null-is-a-bad-invention)
  * [Try to Avoid Using `Null`](#try-to-avoid-using-null)
    * [Example of Using `Optional` to replace `Null`](#example-of-using-optional-to-replace-null)
<!-- TOC -->

---

## What is `Null` in Java?

In Java, `Null` is a special value that can be assigned to object references. It represents the absence of an object or a default value.

It is neither an object nor a type, which is a common misconception that newcomers to the Java language must overcome.

## Why `Null` is A Bad Invention?

`Null` as a "bad invention" in Java, and indeed in many other programming languages, is a perspective shared by many software engineers and computer scientists, most notably Tony Hoare, who invented the null reference. Hoare himself has referred to the invention of the `Null` reference as his "billion-dollar mistake".

It has the following drawbacks:

1. **Null Pointer Exceptions**: One of the most common causes of runtime errors in Java is the NullPointerException. This occurs when a program attempts to use an object reference that has been assigned null. Such errors can lead to system crashes and are often only discovered during runtime. **Any lack of null pointer checking can make programs out of control.**

2. **Reliability**: The presence of null can make software less reliable. **Since any reference can potentially be `Null`, developers must constantly check for null to avoid exceptions**, which adds verbosity and complexity to the code.

3. **Ambiguity**: `Null` can sometimes represent multiple meanings, such as uninitialized, absence of a value, or an error condition. **This ambiguity can lead to confusion and errors in understanding code. In most cases, the caller has no idea about the intention of the method to return `Null`.**

> In Java, due to the existence of `Null`: 
>  - our programs often crash because of unpredictable `NullPointerException`;
>  - our code is filled with lots of meaningless null checks;
>  - we are often confused by the `Null` return from methods.
{: .prompt-tip }

> "When we return `null`, we are essentially creating work for ourselves and foisting problems upon our callers. All it takes is **one missing `null`** check to send an application **spinning out of control**."
> 
> --- Robert C. Martin


## Try to Avoid Using `Null`

Modern programming languages and updates to existing languages have introduced features to mitigate the problems caused by `Null`. For example, Java 8 introduced `Optional` to represent the presence or absence of a value.

In Java, instead of returning `Null`, we can throw an exception or return `Optional`:

```java
// Returning null (not recommended)
public User findUser(String userId) {
  //...
  return null;
}

// Throwing an exception (using for error condition)
public User findUser(String userId) {
   //...
   throw new UserNotFoundException("User not found with ID: " + userId);
}

// Returning an optional (using for absence of the value)
public Optional<User> findUser(String userId) {
  //...
  return Optional.empty();
}
```

### Example of Using `Optional` to replace `Null`

I can provide a simpler example to show the difference between `Optional` and `Null`. 

Suppose we have a method that tries to retrieve a user's email address from a database, but there is a chance that the corresponding user will not be found.

---

**Example of `Null`**:

```java 
public String getEmailOfUser(String userId) {
    User user = findUser(userId); // This method might return null
    if (user != null) {
        return user.getEmail();
    } else {
        return "Email not found";
    }
}
```


**Example of `Optional`**:

```java 
public String getEmailOfUser(String userId) {
    Optional<User> user = findUser(userId);
    return user.map(User::getEmail).orElse("Email not found");
}
```

---



**The advantage of `Optional`**:

- **Code Conciseness**: In the Optional example, we avoid the traditional `if-else` structure, making the code more concise and readable. We also avoid redundant null checks.
- **Null Safety**: By using Optional, we can handle potential null values more safely. We reduce the risk of `NullPointerException`, which can make programs out of control.
- **Functional Style**: The use of Optional supports a functional programming approach, making the code style more modern and fluent.

> If a method needs to return empty values, use Optional. This can avoid `NullPointerException` and meaningless null checking. It also reminds the caller that there may be empty values here.
> 
> **Please don't use `Null` unless you have strong reasons for it.**
{: .prompt-tip }

> When I worked at Huawei, colleagues in my group didn't follow this rule very well. This leads to our project **crashing often due to null pointers**, and the error logs were **full of `NullPointerExceptions`**.
>
> And every time I did code review, my colleagues would always remind me if I did null-pointer checking on the variables. It was really annoying and time-wasting.
>
> So, please don't use `Null`.
{: .prompt-tip }
